# Preparing the hosts

## component installation

Install a [container runtime](https://kubernetes.io/docs/setup/production-environment/container-runtimes) and kubeadm on all the hosts. For detailed instructions and other prerequisites, see [Installing kubeadm](https://kubernetes.io/docs/setup/production-environment/tools/kubeadm/install-kubeadm/).

## CRI-O[](https://kubernetes.io/docs/setup/production-environment/container-runtimes/#cri-o)

This section contains the necessary steps to install CRI-O as a container runtime.

To install CRI-O, follow [CRI-O Install Instructions](https://github.com/cri-o/cri-o/blob/main/install.md#readme).

### cgroup driver[](https://kubernetes.io/docs/setup/production-environment/container-runtimes/#cgroup-driver)

CRI-O uses the systemd cgroup driver per default, which is likely to work fine for you. To switch to the `cgroupfs` cgroup driver, either edit `/etc/crio/crio.conf` or place a drop-in configuration in `/etc/crio/crio.conf.d/02-cgroup-manager.conf`, for example:

```toml
[crio.runtime]
conmon_cgroup = "pod"
cgroup_manager = "cgroupfs"
```

You should also note the changed `conmon_cgroup`, which has to be set to the value `pod` when using CRI-O with `cgroupfs`. It is generally necessary to keep the cgroup driver configuration of the kubelet (usually done via kubeadm) and CRI-O in sync.

In Kubernetes v1.28, you can enable automatic detection of the cgroup driver as an alpha feature. See [systemd cgroup driver](https://kubernetes.io/docs/setup/production-environment/container-runtimes/#systemd-cgroup-driver) for more details.

For CRI-O, the CRI socket is `/var/run/crio/crio.sock` by default.

> [!note] Note:
> If you have already installed kubeadm, see the first two steps of the [Upgrading Linux nodes](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/kubeadm/upgrading-linux-nodes) document for instructions on how to upgrade kubeadm.
> 
> When you upgrade, the kubelet restarts every few seconds as it waits in a crashloop for kubeadm to tell it what to do. This crashloop is expected and normal. After you initialize your control-plane, the kubelet runs normally.

### Overriding the sandbox (pause) image[](https://kubernetes.io/docs/setup/production-environment/container-runtimes/#override-pause-image-cri-o)

In your [CRI-O config](https://github.com/cri-o/cri-o/blob/main/docs/crio.conf.5.md) you can set the following config value:

```toml
[crio.image]
pause_image="registry.k8s.io/pause:3.6"
```

This config option supports live configuration reload to apply this change: `systemctl reload crio` or by sending `SIGHUP` to the `crio` process
## Network setup

kubeadm similarly to other Kubernetes components tries to find a usable IP on the network interfaces associated with a default gateway on a host. Such an IP is then used for the advertising and/or listening performed by a component.

To find out what this IP is on a Linux host you can use:
```shell
ip route show # Look for a line starting with "default via"
```

> [!note] Note:
> If two or more default gateways are present on the host, a Kubernetes component will try to use the first one it encounters that has a suitable global unicast IP address. While making this choice, the exact ordering of gateways might vary between different operating systems and kernel versions.

Kubernetes components do not accept custom network interface as an option, therefore a custom IP address must be passed as a flag to all components instances that need such a custom configuration.

> [!note] Note:
> If the host does not have a default gateway and if a custom IP address is not passed to a Kubernetes component, the component may exit with an error.

Let's break it down:
### Custom Network Interface

A network interface is a point of interconnection between a computer and a private or public network. Sometimes, in complex network environments, you might need Kubernetes components to communicate over a specific network interface.
### Custom IP Address as a Flag

Since Kubernetes components cannot accept a network interface name directly, you need to pass the IP address associated with the desired network interface as a configuration flag to each component that needs it.

To configure the API server advertise address for control plane nodes created with both `init` and `join`, the flag `--apiserver-advertise-address` can be used. Preferably, this option can be set in the [kubeadm API](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/config-api/kubeadm-config.v1beta3) as `InitConfiguration.localAPIEndpoint` and `JoinConfiguration.controlPlane.localAPIEndpoint`

For kubelets on all nodes, the `--node-ip` option can be passed in `.nodeRegistration.kubeletExtraArgs` inside a kubeadm configuration file (`InitConfiguration` or `JoinConfiguration`).

> [!warning] Warning:
 The Kubernetes project recommends against this approach (configuring all component instances with custom IP addresses). Instead, the Kubernetes maintainers recommend to setup the host network, so that the default gateway IP is the one that Kubernetes components auto-detect and use. On Linux nodes, you can use commands such as ip route to configure networking; your operating system might also provide higher level network management tools. If your node's default gateway is a public IP address, you should configure packet filtering or other security measures that protect the nodes and your cluster

### Initializing your control-plane node[](https://kubernetes.io/docs/setup/production-environment/tools/kubeadm/create-cluster-kubeadm/#initializing-your-control-plane-node)

The control-plane node is the machine where the control plane components run, including [etcd](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/configure-upgrade-etcd/) (the cluster database) and the [API Server](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/components/#kube-apiserver) (which the [kubectl](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/kubectl/) command line tool communicates with).

1. (Recommended) If you have plans to upgrade this single control-plane `kubeadm` cluster to high availability you should specify the `--control-plane-endpoint` to set the shared endpoint for all control-plane nodes. Such an endpoint can be either a DNS name or an IP address of a load-balancer.
2. Choose a Pod network add-on, and verify whether it requires any arguments to be passed to `kubeadm init`. Depending on which third-party provider you choose, you might need to set the `--pod-network-cidr` to a provider-specific value. See [Installing a Pod network add-on](https://kubernetes.io/docs/setup/production-environment/tools/kubeadm/create-cluster-kubeadm/#pod-network).
3. (Optional) `kubeadm` tries to detect the container runtime by using a list of well known endpoints. To use different container runtime or if there are more than one installed on the provisioned node, specify the `--cri-socket` argument to `kubeadm`. See [Installing a runtime](https://kubernetes.io/docs/setup/production-environment/tools/kubeadm/install-kubeadm/#installing-runtime).

### Considerations about apiserver-advertise-address and ControlPlaneEndpoint[](https://kubernetes.io/docs/setup/production-environment/tools/kubeadm/create-cluster-kubeadm/#considerations-about-apiserver-advertise-address-and-controlplaneendpoint)

While `--apiserver-advertise-address` can be used to set the advertise address for this particular control-plane node's API server, `--control-plane-endpoint` can be used to set the shared endpoint for all control-plane nodes.

`--control-plane-endpoint` allows both IP addresses and DNS names that can map to IP addresses. Please contact your network administrator to evaluate possible solutions with respect to such mapping.

Here is an example mapping:

```
192.168.0.102 cluster-endpoint
```

Where `192.168.0.102` is the IP address of this node and `cluster-endpoint` is a custom DNS name that maps to this IP. This will allow you to pass `--control-plane-endpoint=cluster-endpoint` to `kubeadm init` and pass the same DNS name to `kubeadm join`. Later you can modify `cluster-endpoint` to point to the address of your load-balancer in an high availability scenario.

Turning a single control plane cluster created without `--control-plane-endpoint` into a highly available cluster is not supported by kubeadm.

> [!fail] Error:
> [ERROR FileContent--proc-sys-net-ipv4-ip_forward]: /proc/sys/net/ipv4/ip_forward contents are not set to 1
> 
> [solution](https://superuser.com/posts/1745419/timeline)
> You need to make sure kubernetes can do IPv4 forwarding. This is assuming you use `iptables` and not `ipvs`. Run the following script to add bridge (for IPv4 and IPv6 and IP forwarding):
> 
> ```shell
> cat <<EOF | sudo tee /etc/sysctl.d/k8s.conf
> net.bridge.bridge-nf-call-iptables  = 1
> net.bridge.bridge-nf-call-ip6tables = 1
> net.ipv4.ip_forward                 = 1
> EOF
> ```
> 
> Also, make you have swap turned off, overlay network and bridge netfilter turned on, like:
> 
> ```shell
> cat <<EOF | sudo tee /etc/modules-load.d/k8s.conf
> overlay
> br_netfilter
> EOF
> sudo modprobe overlay
> sudo modprobe br_netfilter
> 
> # immediately turn off swap - until reboot
> sudo swapoff -a
> # turn off swap after restart
> sudo sed -i 's|^/swap.img|#/swap.img|g' /etc/fstab
> 
> # reboot sysctl
> sudo sysctl --system
> ```
> 
> [solution](https://askubuntu.com/posts/783021/timeline)
> The permission bits for the file `/proc/sys/net/ipv4/ip_forward` is:
> 
> ```bash
> -rw-r--r--
> ```
> with `owner:group` being `root:root`.
> So only `root` can write to the file.
> When you do:
> ```bash
> echo 1 > /proc/sys/net/ipv4/ip_forward
> ```
> as a normal user, you won't be able to write to the file due to insufficient permissions.
> 
> You can do:
> - Use `sudo` and `bash`:
> ```bash
> sudo bash -c 'echo 1 > /proc/sys/net/ipv4/ip_forward'
> ```
> - Use `tee`:
> ```bash
> echo 1 | sudo tee /proc/sys/net/ipv4/ip_forward
> ```
> Note that, you should use /etc/sysctl.conf for persistent operations on the /proc/sys subdirectories.
> 
> In a nutshell, to enable IP forwarding, you can just put the following in /etc/sysctl.conf:
> ```bash
> net.ipv4.ip_forward = 1
> ```
> 
> Then run:
> ```bash
> sudo sysctl -p
> ```
> 
> to have immediate effect.
> 
> This has the same effect as editing the file `/proc/sys/net/ipv4/ip_forward` directly, and not to mention far cleaner and of course persistent.

